---
layout: post
title:  "GitOps"
date:   2021-10-18
tags: [gitops]
---

_GitOps is something which I've heard of, but I didn't fully understand the added value. Similar with DevOps being more than Dev and Ops being in one team, there is more to GitOps than listening to a Git repo for deployments. Before I dived into GitOps I didn't fully understand how it worked and what the advantages are over a single CI/CD pipeline. In this blog I'll be tackling my questions about GitOps and hopefully in this way describe what it is._


## Before GitOps

Describe what I'm used to and it's advantages
CI/CD pipeline as improvement over (partly) manual deployments. 
Increased tracibility of deployments, reduced risk on manual errors and reproducable deployments.
Comes together with Cloud and infra as code

I'm used to a trunk based repo, where merge to main means a single pipeline is triggered:
1. CI: static code analysis, unit test app, build app
2. CD: deploy infra and/or app to test environment, smoke test app
3. If CD for test environment is succesful, repeat step 2 for each environment (for example dev, acc and finally prd)

<!-- image of classic CI/CD -->

## Principles of GitOps

What is GitOps
https://www.gitops.tech/
Comes together with Kubernetes development
What would be the power
End with questions, how is X better than as descrbied in 'Before GitOps'

## Split up in different repo's

Why split up? DevOps means autonomous, so bundle Dev and Ops together.
Although microservices mean splitting it up, but on logical level, not related to application and infra

GitOps split in different repo's, branches or folders.
Go from trunk based to branches seems weird

CI and CD are split, bridge is artifact storage
Seems more manual effort above single pipeline.
This can be automated with a pull mechanism in the CD repo: watches the CI repo and/or the artifact storage

<!-- image of pull based setup -->

The CD tools doesn't execute a list of actions from A to Z, but works with desired state
It watches the expected state in Git and tries to make sure the actual state matches it.
This has some advantages: source code is really valuable, since it actively describes what is running and everything can be recovered, since the source code is the truth. With a classic CI/CD pipeline it might not be reproducable. 

## Deploy to different environments

Split up in folders per environment, with a folder with common config
Weird, because I'm used to single truth of infra, with pipeline deploying it with different params
This would mean I have to request one merge request per environment: create MR to bump version on dev, test it, MR for bump on acc, test it, MR for bump on prod, test it.

But this can be automated by letting the CD pipeline update the git repo and if succesful trigger next env 

<!-- image of deploying to different envs -->
Flow:
CI publishes new version of application to artifact storage
CD watches artifact storage and sees new version is available or manual action by developer to trigger CD
CD patches version in git of application to new version, thus updating the expected state and triggering actual state to be in sync
CD does smoke tests
If tests are okay, patch version in git of application in acc env, thus updating the expected state and triggering actual state to be in sync
CD does smoke tests
Same for prd